# STAT-Capstone

## Research Question
Our analysis of 4th and Short plays in the NFL is centered around the question: On a 4th and short down play, do coaching tendencies influence success beyond situational factors since 2016? In our project a 4th and short play will be defined as a fourth down with three or less yards to gain in regular season games. In order to answer this question, we will first perform exploratory data analysis and use simple logistic regression models to determine what factors may play a role in succeeding on a 4th and short play. Once we have some basic knowledge of the data we are working with, we will begin building different types of models to best predict whether a play will be successful. Some potential models include XGboost and logistic regression models. Using our model for success as a baseline, we want to explore adding a random effect for coaches. To find this effect, we will make a mixed effect model using a random effect for coaches with sufficient 4th down and short attempts. We are interested in measuring the effect of a coach because it could give insight to game strategies that outperform situational expectation. If statistically significant effects are observed, a further exploration could be done to find similarities in successful or unsuccessful coach effects. 

## The Data
Our data is sourced from the R package NFLfastR, providing a dataset of every individual play in the NFL from the regular and postseason. We will consider data from the 2016 season onwards, as this is a rough marker of when offensive strategy became more aggressive. This dataset includes play type, outcome, expected points added, yardage, and other granular data about the play. The one notably missing element is defensive formation, which would have been very useful for determining the most/least successful coverage formations for preventing a 4th down conversion. 

## Relevant References
Yale - Success of Short Yardage Play Types on Fourth Down 
This study focuses more on the descriptive statistics related to 4th down conversion attempts. With a focus on overall conversion rates, the difference in successes for run/pass plays, and the expected points added for each type of play, this provides a good idea of the ‘game theory’ behind 4th down decisions. This paper was published in 2015, so it will be interesting to see how our EDA differs in conversion rates and expected points added.

UPenn - Fourth Down Conversion Frequencies Are Higher Than You Think 
This article details a modeling approach to predict whether a team should ‘go for it’ on 4th and short. This overlaps with our research questions, although we are also focused on whether a team will be successful after they’ve already decided to attempt the conversion. However, the modeling approaches here may still prove informative. The researchers here used a logistic regression model and another undisclosed model that incorporates the bootstrap (likely a random forest). We can use both of these methods in our research and their cited relevant features as a starting point for building our logistic regression model.

The Sternberg Report - “Going For It” on 4th Down: the Problem with NFL Analytics
This report points out some issues with ESPN’s expected points added formula. Luckily, NFLfastR does not use the ESPN model. This article prompted me to check the fit of the expected points model for NFLfastR. Luckily, that’s publicly available data here. This package’s EP model was built with XGboost, and shows strong validation results between probabilities of expected and observed next score.
